feat: :sparkles: add making Python test guide page (#39)
seedcase-project/guidebook: python/tests.qmd

the package code found in `src/`. The name of the test folder can be
anything, but the common name is `tests/`. If you've used the
[`template-python-package`](https://github.com/seedcase-project/template-python-package)
to create your package, then this `tests/` folder will already exist and
be set up for you. Otherwise, you can make the `tests/` folder yourself
manually or via the terminal with `mkdir tests`.

It should look like:

```
package-name/
├── src/
└── tests/
```

Where `package-name/` is the name of your package, and `src/` is the
folder that contains your package's code. By default, pytest will look
for tests in any file that starts with `test_` and will run any tests
(as functions) that start with `test_` in those files.

You should generally create a matching test file for each Python script
that contains public functionality in the `src/` folder. So each test
file should be named `test_<name>.py`, where `<name>` is the name of the
Python script with the public functionality. Following this naming
convention makes it easier to do a cycle of writing and testing when

> using IDEs like [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/) as their
> testing tools will be better able to find and run only those tests for
> the file you are working in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
using IDEs like [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/), as their
testing tools will be better able to find and run only the tests for
the file you are working on.
```

::: callout-tip

> For example, let's say you have a package called `math` with a script
> called `src/math/adding.py`. The test file for that script would be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, let's say you have a package called `maths` with a script
called `src/maths/adding.py`. The test file for that script would be
```
Or change the below

Reviewer: Same for other references to it further on

Author: Ooo, oops, I don't know how the `maths` got below... In North America, it's only "math", but I know UK calls it maths. I'll go with the North American version :stuck_out_tongue:

called `tests/test_adding.py`. So it would look like this:

```

> maths/
> ├── src/
> │   └── maths/
> │       └── adding.py
> └── tests/
>     └── test_adding.py

Author: ```suggestion
math/
├── src/
│   └── math/
│       └── adding.py
└── tests/
    └── test_adding.py
```

```
:::

## How to write tests

Now that you know when and where to write tests, let's look at how to
write them. The tests should be written in Python as functions. When
writing the name for the test, use this general pattern:

-   `test_<function-name>()`, for example `test_adding()`. Use this if
    you only need one test for the function.
-   `test_<action>_<condition>()` or `test_<action>_<object>()`, for
    example `test_add_twos()` or `test_error_non_numbers()`. Use this to
    test specific actions and conditions/objects if the function has
    multiple different actions or conditions.

Tests are structured as functions that use the `assert` statement to
check the output of the function being tested. The `assert` statement
checks if the condition is `True`, and if it is not it outputs an error,
which pytest will report on. Use the following general structure for
tests, called **given, when, then**:

1.  Given: Set up the test data and any other necessary conditions. This
    step isn't always required, as it is used to create the test data
    (if needed) and any other extra conditions that are needed for the

>     test to work. This might be where you create the `expected` output

Reviewer: The "as" clause reads a bit repetitive after the first sentence

>     step isn't always required, as it is used to create the test data
>     (if needed) and any other extra conditions that are needed for the
>     test to work. This might be where you create the `expected` output

Author: ```suggestion
    step isn't always required. This might be where you create the `expected` output
```

    that you want to check against.

> 2.  When: Call the function or method being tested. This would be the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2.  When: Call the function or method being tested. This would yield the
```
Or "create" or "return"

    `actual` output.

> 3.  Then: Check that output of the function or method (`actual`) is as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.  Then: Check that the output of the function or method (`actual`) is as
```

    expected (the `expected` output). This is where you use the `assert`
    statement to check that the output is what you expect it to be.

This is sometimes called ["arrange, act,
assert"](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/explanation/anatomy.html).

> :::: callout-tip

Reviewer: The formatting from here to the end of the document became a bit mangled

Author: Ooo, what the.. fuu :thinking:

In our example of a `math` package and an `adding.py` script, the
function might look like:

`{.python, filename="src/math/adding.py"} def add(a, b):     """Add two numbers together."""     return a + b`

And the test for this function might look like:

\`\`\`{.python, filename="tests/test_adding.py"} import pytest from
math.adding import add def test_add_two_numbers(): """Test adding two
numbers together.""" \# Given expected = 5

```
# When
actual = add(2, 5)

# Then
assert actual == expected
```

```
:::

If the tests are short and very simple, you don't have to use these sections
explicitly, meaning you don't necessarily have to use comments. But as tests get longer and more complex, it can be

> helpful---for reviewers and your future self---to include them. This is the same
> reasoning for using docstrings for test functions. It can help

Reviewer: ```suggestion
helpful---for reviewers and your future self---to include them. The reasoning
for using docstrings in test functions is the same. It can help
```

explain what the test is doing and why it is important.

> In generally, it's best to keep the tests as simple as possible and only test one thing at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, it's best to keep the tests as simple as possible and only test one thing at a time.
```

multiple inputs and outputs with the same test function.
:::

## Running the tests

The
[`template-python-package`](https://github.com/seedcase-project/template-python-package)
includes a file called [`justfile`](https://just.systems/man/en/). This file contains "recipes"
(commands) for many build and testing tasks. It includes a recipe for
running the tests with pytest. You can see a list of the recipes,
including the testing recipe, by running this command in the terminal:

``` {.bash, filename="Terminal"}
just
```

You can also run the tests directly with pytest (via
[uv](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/)) by running this command:

`{.bash, filename="Terminal"} # If pytest is installed in the virtual environment uv run pytest # Or if pytest is installed globally uvx pytest`

::: callout-tip
Because the package is structured with the `src/` folder, you would
normally need to tell pytest that the package is a "src" package by
using the `--import-mode=importlib` option when running pytest or by
setting the option in the `pytest.ini` configuration file. However, the
[`template-python-package`](https://github.com/seedcase-project/template-python-package)

> already has this option set up in the `pytest.ini` file, so you don't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
already has this option set in the `pytest.ini` file, so you don't
```
